foreign
[Music] I'm Norman Wildberger today we're
going to look at a very simple case of the
most important formula in 20th-century
pure mathematics from my point of view
which is the vile character formula now it's
a pretty sophisticated result and in general,
it takes a fair amount of introduction to layout
but we're going to be able to look at a special
case of it which interestingly has a lot of
the general features of the general situation
and in fact, I'm also going to look at the next
simplest case up so we're going to go from su2
then also to su3 and there the situation is
already quite a lot richer and we're going
to see that the same sort of general approach
that I'm going to be showing you applies there
so we're talking about central poly numbers and
their algebra and so let me just review some of
the basic ideas there some of the terminology so
we introduced symmetric polynomials BN which is
the multi-set n Bar N which is our interpretation
of that is Alpha to the minus n plus Alpha to
the N so it's a poly number but it has also a
negative possible exponents so n here can be an
arbitrary integer and the way we want to think
about this is not as a function but rather as a
pair of densities so like point densities or maybe
like Dirac Delta functions if you're a physicist
sitting at n and at n bar or minus n and then
the alternating one very much like at n Bar
anti and N so this represents the poly number
minus Alpha to the minus n plus Alpha to the N
so this one is anti-symmetric this one is
symmetric or alternating and we think of
that as a pair of densities but one positive
density and the other one a negative density
and n and n Bar and then we've already seen these
relations we've already seen in a previous video
what happens when we multiply two of these
together so BM times BN is this combination
of B's am times a n is this combination of B's
also this am times BN we get an alternating
thing which is minus a sub n minus M plus a sub
n plus M and then we saw that we could use these
things to get these formulas that if we take A1
times the particular combination B1 plus B3 plus
B5 Etc up to BL where L is some odd natural number
then that is a sub L plus one and similarly if we
multiply A1 by the sum 1 plus B2 plus B4 up to
some even B sub M then we get a sub M plus one
so these are going to be important we're going
to use these but it's not actually these sort
of elementary ones that we're interested in
rather we're interested in the central poly
numbers which are naturally connecting to a
representation theory of su2 okay and that's
what we're ultimately interested in is a character
formula for the representations of se2 so along
the way we'll say a little bit about su2 and the
three-sphere in the four-dimensional algebra of
quaternions and we'll look at some simplified way
of seeing what the vile character formula is but
I I need to say that there's a bit of a proviso
here because because of my anti-irrational point
of view I'm not allowed to take formulas that
involve implicitly or explicitly irrational
quantities the usual while character formula as
it's usually presented is such a formula so I
have to reinterpret it a little bit that's what
I'm going to do for you today so I'm going to
give you what I think is actually more fundamental
approach to this very very important formula the
algebraic objects that we're really interested
in are the central poly numbers CN and they're
defined for an unnatural number c0 is one which
we think of just as a little Delta function at
zero C1 is Alpha to the minus 1 plus Alpha which
is a pair of Delta functions at -1 and 1. C2 is
Alpha to the minus 2 plus 1 plus Alpha squared
there is its picture C3 is Alpha to the minus
three plus Alpha to the minus 1 plus Alpha plus
Alpha cubed Etc and the pattern is pretty clear so
we're starting if we have C sub n we're starting
at Alpha to the minus n and going up to Alpha to
the N but going up by steps of two in terms of
the exponents so here is the simple baby version
of the vile character formula Associated to the
Dinkin diagram A1 so what is this vile character
formula in this case it's giving us a formula for
C sub n as a quotient of a sub n plus one that's
an alternating poly number divided by A1 that's
another alternating poly number that's sort of the
simplest alternating one and we're taking the a
n plus one just one more than the N here and it's
a kind of an immediate consequence of the limit
just a restatement of the lemma okay because this
CN here is like this one here is a combination of
one plus B2 this one's a combination of B1 plus B3
so in general c n is a is a is a sum of B's okay
it's either starting with one like one plus B2
plus B4 plus B6 Etc up to BN or it's starting with
B1 going B1 plus B3 plus B5 through all the odd
ones up to BN and so this is just a restatement
of the the lemma that we've already put together
so what this does is it connects the world
of symmetric poly numbers with the world of
alternating poly numbers it expresses a symmetric
poly number as a quotient of two alternating ones
and perhaps you can think about it this way that
the alternating ones are in principle relatively
simple because they each consist of just two terms
so even if n is Big a sub n plus one just consists
of a alpha to the minus n and an alpha to the N
with a minus sign and a plus sign well this one
here also just consists of two terms an alpha to
the minus one and Alpha to the one again with a
minus and a plus sign so this thing here can
have actually quite a lot of terms but we're
expressing it as a quotient of two alternating
things each of which is very simple in the sense
of only having two terms now an important note to
make here is that in this version of things there
are no complex exponentials involved okay this is
purely a statement in the world of poly numbers
and that in my view is actually the preferred
way of thinking about what the vile character
formula is really about it's really a
statement about poly numbers although
almost every text and every paper that talks
about it will not express it that way would
rather use complex exponentials which is
unfortunate and then represents in my view
not really a correct understanding of what
algebraically is really going on here so to
solidify this formula in our minds let's just have
a look at some simple examples when n is 0 C 0 is
1 and then the formula is that it's a 1 over A1
and there's A1 and there's A1 the quotient is one
C1 is Alpha to the minus 1 plus Alpha that's a
symmetric poly number according to the formula
it's A2 over A1 here's A2 minus Alpha the minus
2 plus Alpha squared over A1 minus Alpha the
minus 1 plus Alpha and you see that this is just
a relatively uh familiar High School identity C2
is Alpha to the minus two plus one plus Alpha
squared and that's the quotient of A3 which is
this thing over A1 and you can also check that
directly and if you think about it for a little
while you you realize that these formulas are
really in some sense just variants of the sum of
geometric series formula okay which say in simple
version is the following 1 plus r plus r squared
all the way up to R to the N right the formula
for that is as a quotient minus 1 plus r to the N
plus 1 over minus 1 plus r so what's happening
here is very much like that except that we're
sort of shifting everything so instead of going
from one to R to the N we're rather going from
um minus n to n by steps size two okay so there's
a little bit of a shifting in scaling going from
here to here but you should think about it
algebraically it's really sort of essentially
the same thing as this so it's actually quite a
familiar formula now what's this formula really
about well it's about this Lie group called su2
which is the simplest uh that were the smallest
compact simple Lie Group which is sort of like
a continuous or smooth kind of group which
topologically in this case is pretty simple
it's just a sphere it's the three-sphere and
it's useful to think about that correspondence so
let me just very quickly review some things about
quaternions so a reference for this is the famous
math problem Series 13 okay there's four videos
but uh A and B are sort of introductions and then
C and D are about quaternions okay so a quaternion
can be viewed as a four-dimensional object form t
plus XL plus y j plus z k where L J and K are some
quantities or objects that have this algebraic
structure so that the square of each of them is
minus one that L times J is K J times K is l k
times L is J and um yeah in the other direction
J times uh L attribute l J times L is minus k k
times J is minus L and L times K is minus J I'm
using L here instead of I for a reason which is
um quite obvious in a second okay so this is the
algebra of quaternions it's a four-dimensional
space and here's some kind of representation
of it so we have one axis here which is the axis
through one okay and the um the hyperplane which
is perpendicular to it through the origin zero
here is the space span by the the basis vectors l
J and K okay and they all lie on the the unit
sphere so there's actually four axes here the
t-axis the x-axis the y-axis and the Z axis and
I'm also showing you the the the unit sphere here
which is S3 okay and the connection with that we
can get through this correspondence between this
quaternion and this two by two Matrix but now it's
a two by two Matrix with complex entries and so
now I'm going to introduce I as the usual I for
complex numbers okay so that's why I don't want
to use I up here because this I is different from
any of these other units so we can identify such
a quaternion we can just take the coefficients
t x y and z and cook up a two by two matrix by
having entry t plus X Y here and T minus x i here
and Y plus z i here and minus y plus z i here then
if we call this thing Alpha and we call this thing
beta then this thing here is Alpha bar the complex
conjugate and this one here is minus beta bar the
complex conjugate of this thing with a minus sign
and then the group su2 is characterized by
its those things of this kind for which the
determinant is one the special representing
determinant equals one which is the condition
that Alpha times Alpha bar plus beta times beta
bar equals one and when we rewrite that condition
in terms of the t x y and z which you can easily
do because the this is the quadrants of alpha
all the quadrants of alpha is t squared plus x
squared and the quadrants of beta is y squared
plus Z squared so this condition is the condition
t squared plus x squared plus y squared plus Z
squared on Q equals one that really is this unit
sphere in this four-dimensional space so it's a
three-dimensional sphere S3 and uh that's a
Compact Lie group so it's closed under the
multiplication of the quaternion algebra okay so
you take any two elements in these units here you
multiply them you're getting another element in
the unit sphere now if particular interest is what
happens when we look at just diagonal matrices
once for which beta is zero so if beta is zero
then this condition is that Alpha times Alpha bar
is one in other words that Alpha has quadrants one
in other words that it lies on it's like the
in the unit circle in in the in the complex
numbers however but just expressed in terms of um
T and uh and X so it means that t and and X we're
just looking at those two coefficients we're on a
circle so it's actually this circle here passing
through 1 and L it's like a equatorial circle
of this three-dimensional sphere so those are
things of the form Alpha zero zero Alpha inverse
because if Alpha is a unit complex number then
its conjugate is the same as its inverse so we
can rewrite it like this okay and the the vile
character formula is really uh describing the
characters of the irreducible representations
of of su2 and we can think about that in this in
this model of it as it's a conjugation invariant
function a character it turns out to be a
conjugation invariant function which means
that it's sort of constant latitude and sphere
okay so you get all of those and so the function
the character is constant on each one of those so
it only really depends on on this direction here
so okay this is a an example of a Compact Lie
group and it's the simplest non-abelian Lie
group of course the circle itself is also a
Compact Lie group but it's not a billion but
this su2 or the three-sphere is the smallest
non-abelian Compact Lie group so it plays a
really distinguished role in mathematics but
remarkably maybe not so remarkably it also
plays a really distinguished role in physics as
well and this story of these Central poly numbers
is all about the characters of this group so I
want to give you just a little bit more of an idea
of what this vile character formula looks like
in general it's rather an imposing formula but I
just want to talk about it but before we do that
let's just say a few things about Hermann vile
who's a German mathematician who ended up spending
quite a bit of time in Syria where he actually
um became friends with Einstein and also ended up
in Princeton at The Institute for advanced studies
there and he's a very influential mathematician
in the 20th century in my view he is the most
important mathematician of the 20th century in
pure mathematics so I have no hesitation in saying
that he made contributions in a wide variety
of areas but he was also straddling physics so
he actually made really important contributions
to physics and in fact modern gauge theory was
really something that basically he introduced
so he is so his work that maybe that he's most
famous for these days is his foundational work on
compact groups and their representations and the
vile character formula and and other related
results in this direction it's basically a
theory that he he brought into being and it
became hugely influential in physics and in
mathematics throughout the century but he also did
foundational work in number theory in in logic he
had great interest in philosophy in the history
of mathematics and also made contributions to
analysis and notably also I have a great amount
of sympathy for him because he was also skeptical
about real numbers okay he could see that there
was a problem with real numbers and he struggled
for many years trying to figure out whether
he was on Brower's side of intuitionism of the
Dutch mathematician Brower or whether he was
you know more in the on the side of a large
assist because I think he was actually a student
of Hilbert but in any case um he he definitely had
an idea that the foundations of mathematics were
not really in in a in a good state and he didn't
really know how to resolve that perhaps but he
could certainly identify there was a problem
okay so here is the vile character
formula as it's often presented okay so
um without having to describe all of these things
so let me say very roughly that we're talking
about a compact group like you could think about
su2 and here's a group element and it's written in
exponential form so that you're really starting
with a sort of an infinitesimal element in the
so-called Lie algebra but you should think about
this thing here as being an element in an analog
of the the circle that we we identified for se2
what's called a carton subgroup okay so that's a
subgroup for which any other element in the group
is conjugate to to one of the elements in this
cartoon subgroup and so that means that if you
understand the character on the cartan subgroup
then you understand it everywhere okay so he's
describing the character's values on a particular
cartoon subgroup and he's saying that in terms
of this infinitesimal so element H and in the
corresponding Lie algebra that we we have to take
some signed sum so there's a finite group called
the vile group very famous and we're having to sum
over the vial group and we're summing some plus
or minus ones and here are exponentials e to the
Lambda plus rho where Lambda is some weight which
corresponds to the irreducible representation
that we're we're talking about okay and rho
is some important kind of quantum shift that's
somehow mysteriously occurs okay and down in the
denominator it's called the vile denominator it's
a similar kind of thing but now there's no Lambda
it's just the exponential of e to the rho of wh
but we're still summing over over vial translates
of H so in the case of su2 okay what this sort of
amounts to is that here is for example a typical
character of s U2 say chi 3 which is this Central
poly number which we're calling C3 so with Delta
functions at 3 1 minus one and minus three and
the vile character formula in this case is the
formula that we've already talked about but it's
this quotient of the A4 over the A1 and the A4
for us we can visualize that as a Delta function
at four and minus a Delta function at minus four
and so here you see that in this case here the
vile group is just the reflection about zero the
vile group is very simple it only has two elements
the identity and this reflection so there's only
two elements in this sum corresponding to the two
elements that are appearing here one with a plus
sign and the other one with a minus sign and in
the denominator it's the same kind of thing sum of
two elements one is a plus sign one with a minus
sign but now we're sort of at the place where rho
is row is in this case a one so in this story here
row you should think of that perhaps as being that
that point one there and the Lambda is is three
and so this four here is the Rope a Lambda that's
appearing here so this is a very special and very
simple baby kind of vile character formula but
it's still an important example because actually
many features of the of the general case are
already found here in some sort of simple way so
the beauty of the wild character formula is that
it extends in a remarkable direction to include
all the compact simple Lie groups and these are
classified they were classified by killing and
carton uh you know at the end of the 19th century
into two unbounded families the an family and the
DN family so N is a natural number and uh the E6
E7 E8 these are three exceptional ones in the E
family and then two other exceptional ones called
F4 and G2 and there's you know years of discussion
to be had about all of this story so it's it's
very big and rich thing and in fact in my wild
egg Mass YouTube channel I have an entire series
called exceptional structures and Mathematics and
physics coming from Dynamics on graphs where these
things and the corresponding graphs are sort of
the center objects in this Theory and I'm looking
at everything from this graph theoretical point
of view coming from this so what I'm saying here
I'm going to be very quick and I'm just going to
talk about A2 which is the next simplest example
up from A1 up from the su2 case but that's
already quite rich and has huge consequences
for physics but this whole thing generalizes
in some kind of massive fashion and you know
I'm aiming to explain a good amount of that in
that series so for members of the wild egg Mass
channel the series is called Dynamics on graphs
so in this case here we're going from the A1 the
former case to A2 which group theoretically is
going from Su to that two by two Matrix Group to
su3 which is a corresponding three by three group
of complex matrices and this one is particularly
interesting for particle physicists because it
corresponds to the strong force in the standard
model and it turns out that exactly this picture
here which I'm about to explain to you it's a sort
of an aspect of the wild character formula in this
case here is really responsible for What's called
the eight-fold way introduced by Murray Gelman
and uh in the in the 1960s which really sort of
sort of set the stage for the modern theory of
the standard model of particle physics so what
do we see here okay so without going into any
detail what we see is sort of a two-dimensional
version of that one-dimensional thing that we saw
before so now there are two dimensions and you
can think about a basis being in this direction
in this direction so here's Alpha you can think
about that as the same poly number Alpha as we had
before or rather we think about a Delta function
sitting there okay if you think of a Delta
function sitting there as representing that poly
number Alpha but now there's a second polynomial
beta in sort of another direction okay and then we
have various combinations of them and in this
case the we're going to choose the Lambda to
be this particular Point here okay which is like
Alpha plus beta and corresponds to the poly number
Alpha times beta okay now it's not really
a poly number it's really a multi-number so
this story here really makes more sense when
we go down one level from the poly number
story to the multi-number story it's sort
of necessary for us to do that and part of
the motivation of thinking about poly numbers
this way is to facilitate that movement okay
to be able to smoothly understand what I'm
basically presenting here for example but
so this is just to give you a rough idea of how
the vile character formula works so we're going
to take a particular representation so there's
a whole bunch of there's unbounded numbers of
representations basically each one of these
dots in this chamber here corresponds to an
irreducible representation and if we choose that
one there then it turns out that the dimension is
eight it's an eight-dimensional representation
and it turns out that the character is given by
these these blue circles when they're there there
there there and two of them in the middle there
okay now these these ones here okay these
correspond to Delta functions corresponding
to these integral poly numbers so this one's Alpha
Beta but this one here you have to kind of go over
two alphas and then go back a beta so this one
here corresponds to Alpha squared over beta or
we could say beta to the minus one and then if we
keep going on there we this one is Alpha Beta to
the minus 2 Alpha to the minus 1 beta to the minus
one alpha to the minus two beta Alpha minus one
beta squared and then this one here corresponds to
two times the identity so that's just the number
two so this is the character of this corresponding
representation and it's the fact that this
character and this pattern in blue correspond to
an octet of baryons that Murray Gelman realized
and also there's a sort of corresponding
octet of mesons or maybe a non-net but anyway
so it's it's the correspondence of some
elementary particles when you map them in
the right way with this diagram here which was
really the start of this version of the standard
model and what the vile character formula says
is that this is a symmetric polynomial but now
with regard to a group which is a little bit
bigger the bile group consists of reflection
in this axis but also reflection in this axis
and in fact also reflection in this axis so the
vile group here has the property that if we take
one of these points like this one here then the
orbit of that point under all the group actions
is exactly this hexagon general it's a hexagon
and what we have on the right-hand side of the
vile character formula is a quotient of two
alternating polynomials or poly numbers but poly
numbers in Alpha and beta and they correspond to
the following so the numerator corresponds to the
image of this one here which is Lambda plus rho so
it turns out the rho whatever that is it's sort of
this mysterious sort of quantum thing that turns
out in this case to also be that one there okay
so Lambda is that and rho is that also so Lambda
plus rho is this one up here and so if we take the
vile group orbit of this we get these six points
in red and the vile character formula
says that we should take the corresponding
sort of integral poly numbers like this one is
Alpha squared beta squared this one corresponds to
Alpha to the fourth beta to the minus two this one
to Alpha squared beta to the minus four Etc but we
should take an alternating sum so plus minus plus
minus plus minus okay so that's the alternating
that's the the numerator and then in the
denominator this sort of vile denominator we get a
simpler alternating one which we just obtaining by
taking this row and doing the same thing to it so
the image of rho under the group is these things
here these six ones and we get correspondingly
alternating things alpha beta for that one alpha
squared beta to the minus one for that Alpha Beta
squared Alpha Beta to the minus 2 for that rather
this one is minus Alpha minus one beta minus one
this one alpha the minus two beta and this one
out minus Alpha to the minus 1 beta squared
and these the exponents here are just found
by Vector things you know so to get here you
have to do a one alpha and you start to
subtract two beta and that's why this is
going to be Alpha times beta to the minus
two it's going to correspond to that term
okay so what's happening here is that this
character this is what we're interested in
from the representation Theory and from also
from the physics but vile is giving us an
alternate way of thinking about what this thing
is as a ratio or a quotient of two alternating
sums but here the sums are over just single orbits
of the vile group well over here we actually have
a sum over multiple orbits of the vile group okay
in this case because it's because this thing is
relatively small there's only actually two orbits
the orbit of this thing in the orbit of this thing
but if Lambda was further out here then this
would be a very very big expression okay but
these ones here are both still relatively
simple they always have a form like this
just with six terms here six terms here but with
different exponents okay so there's something very
attractive about this form of the thing but the
actual thing that we're interested in is this this
big thing on the left here which is the actual
character of the corresponding representation
now I realize that was all way too fast and you
know and really requires familiarity with a lot
of other things so I am going to talk about
this whole story in great length and great
detail over in the Dynamics on graphs Series
in Wild Egg Maths so if you're interested in
that make sure you head on over there
and start catching up on that series
so from the point of view of a physicist
these representations of like su2 or su3
roughly correspond to particles or families
of particles and interaction between particles
sort of algebraically is manifested by tensor
producting the representations like that's a
little bit sophisticated to taking products of
matrices and somewhat complicated fashion but
it turns out that the characters the corresponding
characters of these tensor products are very easy
to deal with they're just the products of the
corresponding characters so at the level of the
characters the the interaction of these particles
is pretty simple that's why the character theory
is so attractive and important and it turns out
here then we can make some contact with just the
algebra of central poly numbers because for su2 if
we go back to that the characters are all of the
form C sub n okay and so a typical kind of tensor
product calculation would be to multiply two of
these things and ask what do we get so what do we
get if we take the poly number the integral poly
number C3 and multiply it by the integral poly
number C4 well I'm going to do that for you here
okay so let's see what we get so of course I could
just multiply this thing out but I'm going to do
it in a more diagrammatical way which is more
reflective of the way I want you to think about
these things okay as densities so let's think
about this is the density that we're going to
move and translate and put down in various places
depending on these values so at Alpha to the minus
3 that's minus three there we're going to take a
copy of this thing here and sort of translate it
so that it's centered at -3 so what does that look
like well it means there's going to be a one there
and then we go up two and we go up two and we
go down to and we go down to okay so we've taken
this thing here and sort of basically convolved it
or multiplied by Alpha to the minus 3. now we're
going to do the same thing with Alpha to the minus
1. so we're going to take the same thing over here
now translate it so it's centered at -1 okay so
I'm going to put it down on top so the masses are
going to add so that I'm going to do it like that
so now there's another Mass there and another Mass
there and another Mass there and then two on the
other side one on that one and one on that one
okay and now I'm going to do the same
thing with Alpha so centered here I'm
going to take a copy of this and plop it
there so there'll be one in the middle
one on that side and one a little bit further
away there will also be one here add one here
and finally one centered here so now
I'm centering this thing here here so
there's one there there's one over here
and there's one over here and there's
also another one on this side so I'll put it
up there and another one on this side here
so that's the end result
okay um let me just leave it that and let's unless
before we interpret this let me see if we could
sort of do this in another way suppose we didn't
want to actually do the multiplication but just
wanted to use some of the formulas that we already
know so in particular we know the vile character
formula we know that C3 is A4 over A1 and C4 is
A5 over A1 so one thing we could do is we could
look at one of those prior formulas that tells
us how to multiply two A's so A4 times A5 turns
out to be minus B1 plus B9 so we could write
it like this minus B1 plus B9 over A1 squared
however maybe it's not so clear how to interpret
that okay so uh yeah we can do that but maybe it's
not entirely helpful but it turns out that there's
something else that we can do that's sort of
halfway to this okay not going the full wave just
halfway and what that means is we're going to take
C4 and replace it with A5 A1 but C3 we're going
to sort of leave it as it is and express it in
terms of the B's because we know how to multiply
A's and B's okay so remember C3 uh there's C3
there that's really the sum of that one there
is B1 and that's B3 so C3 is really B1 plus B3
so if we do that then we can write it as A5
times B1 plus A5 times B3 all over a single A1
and now there's another law that we had also on
the first page which is that a sub M times B sub
n equals minus a sub n minus M plus a sub M
plus n Okay cool so what is A5 times B1 so
we have five and one so here we have minus
1 minus five one minus five is minus four
so but a to the minus 4 or a sub minus 4 is the
same as minus a sub 4 because it's alternating
so this minus sign changes to a plus we get
a plus A4 and this one will just be a six
and A5 A3 the same kind of thing happens the
difference is 2 the sum is eight so we get
A2 plus A8 over A1 and now we can rewrite this
because again the vial character formula allows
us now to rewrite quotients in terms of C's
so A4 over A1 well that was C3 actually maybe
we'll start with the smallest one A2 over A1
that's C1 and then A4 over A1 that's C3 and
then A6 over A1 that's C5 and finally A8 over A1
that's C7 okay so that's what we're getting there
and that's the kind of decomposition that's very
important and physicists are doing this all the
time where you tensor product two representations
it's like taking the product of these two
representations and then breaking up the sum as
a linear combination of other representations
on the character side just means we're multiplying
two characters and writing the result as a sum of
individual characters let's compare that to
what we got when we just sort of did it with
algebra in terms of densities you see the the
C1 where's C1 in the story C1 is the alpha plus
Alpha minus one so it's that thing there and
that thing there that's C1 and where is C3 well
C3 is uh let me do this one this one and this
one and this one and this one okay that's a C3
and the C5 well that's that one and that one and
that one and that one and that one and that one
and finally the C7 it's that one that one that one
that one that one that one that one and that one
so yes indeed what we're getting with this
kind of streamlined a clever use of the vile
character formula agrees with what we got
longhand and it turns out that pretty well
exactly this thinking applies to the more
General situation in particular it applies
to su3 but in general it applies to higher
dimensional Lie groups as well so they're
sort of famous formulas for decompositions
of tensor products which are basically just
elaborations of exactly this technique that
I've shown you here in this simplest case of su2
all right great Okay so we've covered a lot of
territory today and I don't expect you to have
absorbed it all in some sense what I want to do
really is motivate you okay to thinking about the
the usefulness of expanding our poly number
approach with this with these integral poly
numbers with negative numbers but both in terms
of coefficients and exponents to the multi-number
story where we have more than just one variable
that's really what's happening in the su3 case for
example it happens in in all the other cases as
well and I also want to motivate those people who
have some background in representation Theory to
think a little bit again about the vile character
formula so I'm suggesting that the vile character
formula is really not about exponentials okay
and the usual angular representation of maximal
tauri Etc is is is not really what you want to do
you want to think about things in terms of poly
numbers it's all just polynomial algebra people
the vile character formula is 100 polynomial
algebra and if you've watched this video carefully
maybe watch it a couple of times and you have
some background in representation Theory you
should probably be able to sort of to see how
that goes if you're a graduate student it's a
great thing to spend a few months thinking about
I'm Norman Wildberger thanks for listening [Music]
thank you